CSP Number
1
PI
Gorfe, Alemayehu A.
INSTITUTION
University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX
PROJECT TITLE
Allosteric Ras Inhibitors: Decoupling Catalysis and Membrane Binding
BTRC PERSONNEL
R. Amaro, P. Papadopoulos, J. Bush, J .Durrant, D. Lee, R. Malmstrom, S. Forli
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 1, 2, and 4
STATUS
New
EXTERNAL FUNDING
NIH/NIGMS R01 GM100078 (Gorfe, PI) 9/2012-8/2017
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
Hocker, H. J., K. J. Cho, C. Y. Chen, N. Rambahal, S. R. Sagineedu, K. Shaari, J. Stanslas, J. F. Hancock and A. A. Gorfe (2013). Andrographolide derivatives inhibit guanine nucleotide exchange and abrogate oncogenic Ras function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110: 10201-10206
Prakash, P., A. Sayyed-Ahmad and A. A. Gorfe (2012). The role of conserved waters in conformational transitions of Q61H K-ras. PLoS Comput Biol 8: e1002394.
IMAGE
csp1.png
Overview of our dynamics-guided strategy for anti-Ras drug discovery.
DESCRIPTION
Ras proteins are key regulators of diverse cell-signaling pathways. Somatic Ras mutations are found in ~25% 
of all human tumors and in up to 90% of specific tumor types. However, decades of efforts by both 
academia and industry have failed to yield selective Ras inhibitors. Factors limiting the development of leads 
to drugs, especially when targeting the GTP-hydrolyzing site, include conservation of the active site in a 
large number of small G-proteins, the high concentration and affinity of cellular GTP for Ras, and 
the requirement for Ras signaling of multiple regulators and specific spatiotemporal membrane-organization.

We hypothesize that identifying and targeting allosteric sites on Ras by small molecule ligands will inhibit 
its aberrant function by de-coupling the nucleotide-binding and membrane-interacting regions or by shifting the 
equilibrium between active, inactive, and intermediate conformational states. We, therefore, designed a 
therapeutic strategy that is guided by dynamics and focuses on allosteric sites of Ras. Our approach involves 
multi-level computations and experiments.

The figure shows an overview of our dynamics-guided strategy for anti-Ras drug discovery. Key aspects 
include ensemble generation in solution and in membrane; identification of multiple binding sites; generation 
of small molecule hits for each binding site and conformer; and experimental testing of candidate inhibitors.

