CSP Number
10
PI
Sachse, Frank; Bridge, John
INSTITUTION
Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute & Bioengineering Department, University of Utah
PROJECT TITLE
Remodeling of Transverse Tubular System in Heart Failure and after Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
BTRC PERSONNEL
\R. Amaro, A. McCulloch, M. Holst, R. Kerchoffs, R. Lawrence, R. Malmstrom, A. Mihaylova, S. Phan, J.Vandorn
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 1, 2, 3, and 4
STATUS
Continuing (Started 5/12)
EXTERNAL FUNDING
Nora Eccles Treadwell Foundation (Sachse, PI), 7/1/2009-6/30/2014; R01 HL094464 (Sachse, PI), 5/15/2010-4/30/2015; Research grant from the Treadwell Foundation (Bridge, PI), 7/1/2012-6/30/2016; RO1 HL70828-05A2 (Goldhaber, PI; sub-award 1553 G KC907 to Bridge, PI), 8/1/2009-7/31/2014
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
Kekenes-Huskey P, Cheng Y, Hake J, Sachse F, Bridge J, Holst M, McCammnon A, McCulloch A, Michailova AP (2012) Modeling effects of L- type Ca2+ current and Na+-Ca2+ exchanger on Ca2+ trigger flux in rabbit myocytes with realistic t-tubule geometries. Frontiers in Computational Physiology and Medicine: Calcium Signaling in Cardiac Myocyte 3, 351.
IMAGE
csp10.png
Confocal images of sarcolemma.
DESCRIPTION
More than five million Americans suffer and more than 250,000 die annually from heart failure (HF). 
Several types of HF are associated with dyssynchronous ventricular contraction, which has deleterious 
effects on mechanical performance and manifests as a prolonged QRS duration.

Various types of remodeling of cellular proteins and structures underlying excitation-contraction (EC) 
coupling have been described in dyssynchronous heart failure (DHF). In particular, remodeling of the 
distribution of transverse (t)-tubules, which are invaginations of the sarcolemma, and cardiac ryanodine 
receptors (RyRs) has been reported. RyRs are ion channels that form clusters in the membrane of the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). RyRs are responsible for intracellular calcium release from the SR. 
The close proximity of RyR clusters and t-tubules, crucial for efficient EC coupling, is impaired in 
various heart diseases including DHF.

In our experimental studies, we are applying confocal imaging of ventricular myocytes and methods of 
digital image processing to characterize the geometry of the t-system in normal and diseased heart cells. 
This allows us to quantify the distribution of t-system associated proteins such as RyRs and study 
the involvement of these t-system-associated proteins in EC coupling. In particular, we are investigating 
structural remodeling of the spatial distribution of t-tubules and RyRs in cells from animal models of 
DHF and CRT. We are characterizing spatial heterogeneity of structural and functional remodeling within 
cells using a combination of imaging and computational approaches.

Figure shows confocal images of sarcolemma including t-tubules (blue) and RyR clusters (red) obtained 
from tissue sections from DHF animal model.  Areas indicated by dashed rectangles are magnified on 
the right-hand side.  Arrows point to locally increased RyR density and t-tubule loss at cell ends.
