CSP Number
2
PI
Gumbart, James
INSTITUTION
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
PROJECT TITLE
Combating Infection through Atomic-Scale Modeling of Unique Bacterial Systems
BTRC PERSONNEL
\R. Amaro, P. Papadopoulos, J. Durrant, R. Malmstrom, M. Sanner, L. Auten
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 1, 2, and 4
STATUS
Continuing (Started 5/13)
EXTERNAL FUNDING
NIH Research Scholar Development Award K22-AI100927 (PI: Gumbart), 05/2013-05/2015; NIH Research Project Grant R01-GM101425 (Jensen, PI; Gumbart, Co-I), 04/2013-03/2017; NIH Research Project Grant R01- GM067887 (Schulten, PI; Gumbart, Co-I), 07/2013-06/2015
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
IMAGE
csp2.png
SecY complex (grey, orange, yellow) in a membrane, bound to channel partners.
DESCRIPTION
Combating infection has become increasingly difficult because bacteria are acquiring resistance 
at an incredible pace, and current approaches to antibiotic development are producing diminishing returns. 
Accounting for the atomic details of essential bacterial systems and their flexibility requires a 
method that can capture both properties simultaneously. Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, with 
their unique combination of effectively unlimited spatial and temporal resolution, provide a means 
for generating novel structural data and elucidating a system's evolution between structurally 
characterized states. When combined with rigorous experimental input and verification, simulations 
represent a powerful tool for uncovering new, detailed insights into the structural, kinetic, 
and energetic aspects of synthesis mechanisms in bacteria. MD simulations also permit an 
interpretation of experimental results in terms of underlying molecular events. The use of the 
myriad protein conformations observed in MD simulations will enable discovery of conformationally 
selective ligands that might otherwise escape detection based on crystal structures alone.

This project brings together diverse expertise in computer-aided drug discovery, workflow 
development, emerging cyberinfrastructure technologies, and domain-specific interface development 
to facilitate and enable discovery of new lead compounds for potential novel classes of antibiotics.

The figure shows (A) Structure of the ribosome-SecY-nascent protein complex built with MDFF as preliminary results; 
(B) SecA (red) bound to SecYEG.
