CSP Number
5
PI
Schnaufer, Achim; Greaney, Michael; S\&#248;rensen, Jesper
INSTITUTION
University of Edinburgh (Schnaufer); University of Manchester (Greaney), UCSD (S\&#248;rensen)
PROJECT TITLE
Integrated Strategies for Inhibitor Development against Trypanosoma brucei RNA Editing Ligase 1
BTRC PERSONNEL
R. Amaro, I. Altintas, D. Crawl, J. Durant, R. Lawrence, D. Lee, R. Malmstrom, S. Phan, S. Forli
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 1, 2 and 4
STATUS
Continuing (Started 5/11)
EXTERNAL FUNDING
Wellcome Trust (PIs: Schnaufer, Greaney), 6/1/2011-6/31/2015; Alfred Benzon Foundation (PI: S\&#248;rensen), 2011-2014
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
Durrant, J. D., L. Hall, R. V. Swift, M. Landon, A. Schnaufer and R. E. Amaro (2010). Novel naphthalene-based inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei RNA editing ligase 1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 4(8): e803.
IMAGE
csp5.png
Conducting lead optimization with AutoClickChem.
DESCRIPTION
As available drugs against African Sleeping Sickness are often ineffective, subject to resistance, 
difficult to administer, costly, and in some cases highly toxic, there is an urgent need for novel 
trypanocidal therapeutics. All trypanosomatids rely on a unique form of RNA editing for mitochondrial 
gene expression. RNA editing Ligase 1 (REL1), a key enzyme in this editing process, is essential 
for the survival of T.brucei. Furthermore, T.cruzi and Leishmania spp. have close TbREL1 
orthologs, suggesting that REL1 inhibitors may have broad anti-trypanosomal activity. Importantly, 
humans lack enzymes closely related to REL1, thus minimizing the potential for harmful side effects. 
The active site in REL1 is flexible and is made up of a number of charged protein side-chains.

The purpose of this project is to probe the flexibility of this pocket using enhanced sampling 
simulation techniques and incorporating the relevant protein conformations into our drug 
design approach. We aim to validate the use of conformations based on accelerated Molecular 
Dynamics in drug discovery. And lastly, based on the simulations, we can extract details about the native 
ligand binding, enzymatic function, and product dissociation.
