CSP Number
6
PI
Wesseling, John
INSTITUTION
Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
PROJECT TITLE
Development and Structure of Auditory Brainstem Circuits for Temporal Processing
BTRC PERSONNEL
\R. Amaro, J. Bush, L. Clementi, R. Lawrence, D. Lee, R. Malmstrom, S. Peltier, S. Phan, J. Schulze, M. Sanner, L. Auten
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 2, and 4
STATUS
Continuing (Started 5/12)
EXTERNAL FUNDING
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (BFU2009-12160) (PI: Wesseling); European Union (PCIG11-GA-2012-322013) (Wesseling, PI)
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
IMAGE
csp6.png
Screen snapshot of the custom evaluation program.
DESCRIPTION
Recent experimental and theoretical advances have produced a new kinetic framework for rate-limiting steps 
in synaptic vesicle trafficking. The original work was conducted on Schaffer collateral synapses in the 
hippocampus, but our collaborators have preliminary electrophysiological data from gigantic and very 
fast calyx of Held synapses in the brain stem suggesting that the framework is generalizable. 
The rate-limiting steps cause two distinct types of short-term depression in connection strength when 
synapses are used heavily, but the molecular and cell biological correlates remain to be identified. 

Our project seeks to identify the correlate of the longest lasting component of depression, 
termed "supply-rate depression." Our project is using and extending the TxBR software suite, and we are 
building our own analytical tool set on top of the refined data that came out of the capabilities developed 
during NBCR's current funding period. Without TxBR, we wouldn't be able to track the thin filaments that 
link vesicles and test the hypothesis that vesicles are connected as part of the vesicle release machinery 
of the presynaptic membrane. So further improvements to the TxBR software package will be useful to our work.

The figure shows a screen snapshot of the custom evaluation program used for judging if pairs 
of synaptic vesicles are cross-linked. The user can advance to the next or previous image quickly 
by clicking the right or left arrow, respectively. Arrows advance to next non-evaluated image when the 
"Not Evaluated Only" box is checked, as it is in this example. The software presents pairs 
to the evaluator in a random order allowing the unbiased comparison of cross links between genotypes 
and brain regions as well as between a variety of tissue preparation, image acquisition, and 
tomogram reconstruction techniques.
