CSP Number
8
PI
Segars, Paul
INSTITUTION
Duke University, Durham, NC
PROJECT TITLE
Simulation Tools for 3D and 4D CT and Dosimetry
BTRC PERSONNEL
\R. Amaro, I. Altintas, A. McCulloch, M. Holst, R. Kerchoffs, R. Malmstrom, A. Mihaylova, J.Vandorn
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 2, 3, and 4
STATUS
New (Started 5/13), transitioned from DBP
EXTERNAL FUNDING
NIH R01 EB0018381 (Segars, PI), 08/01/2010-06/30/2014
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
Gonzales, M. J., Sturgeon, G., Krishnamurthy, A., Hake, J., Jonas, R., Stark, P., Rappel, W., Narayan, S., Zhang, Y., Segars, W., McCulloch, A., 2013a. A three-dimensional finite-element model of human atrial anatomy: New methods for cubic Hermite meshes with extraordinary vertices (accepted for publication in Medical Image Analysis).
Gonzales, M. J., Sturgeon, G., Krishnamurthy, A., Hake, J., Jonas, R., Stark, P., Rappel, W. J., Narayan, S. M., Zhang, Y., Segars, W. P., McCulloch, A. D., 2013b. A three-dimensional finite element model of human atrial anatomy: New methods for cubic Hermite meshes with extraordinary vertices. Med Image Anal 17, 525-537
DESCRIPTION
Diagnostic imaging techniques can play a vital role in reducing the mortality rate and strain on the health care system 
caused by cardiovascular disease by providing more efficient methods to screen and manage cardiac patients. Many 
non-invasive imaging modalities and tools are being studied and developed to better detect, stratify, and monitor 
therapy for patients with cardiac disease. As new methods emerge in response to cardiac disease, a major challenge 
is how to determine which technique is best in terms of patient diagnosis and treatment, and how different techniques 
may fit together to form a complete patient management strategy.

Computer-based simulation is widely used to evaluate and improve medical imaging devices and procedures. These 
techniques involve computer-generated phantoms that define patient anatomy and physiology, and models of the 
imaging process. Given a model of the imaging process, imaging data of a computer phantom can be simulated 
as if it were an actual patient. Foremost among these computer-generated phantoms is the 4D extended 
Cardiac-Torso (XCAT) phantom.

The goal of this project is to extend the FE human heart model to simulate abnormal functioning of the heart 
due to cardiovascular disease and integrate these abilities into the XCAT phantom.

