CSP Number
9
PI
Zhang, Yongjie
INSTITUTION
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
PROJECT TITLE
Multiscale Diffusion Modeling in Cardiac Myofilaments
BTRC PERSONNEL
R. Amaro, A. McCulloch, M. Holst, R. Kerchoffs, R. Malmstrom, A. Mihaylova, J.Vandorn, M. Sanner, L. Auten
TR&D PROJECT
Cores 1, 2, and 3
STATUS
New
EXTERNAL FUNDING
NSF CAREER Award (Zhang, PI), 8/1/2012-7/31/2017; FA95501110346- AFOSR (Zhang, PI), 8/1/2011-7/31/2014; ONR Young Investigator Award (Zhang, PI), 6/15/2010-6/14/2014
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS
Tao Liao, Yongjie Zhang, Peter M. Kekenes-Huskey, Yuhui Cheng, Anushka Michailova, Andrew D. McCulloch, Michael Holst, J. Andrew McCammon. Multi-core CPU or GPU-accelerated multi-scale modeling for biomolecular complexes. Molecular Based Mathematical Biology, 1,164-179, 2013
IMAGE
csp9.png
Multi-scale model of thin actin filament complex. 
DESCRIPTION
Today the key barriers computational biologists face are: (1) lack of efficient methods to effectively 
construct accurate, multi-scale geometric models for large protein complexes; (2) the inability of existing 
methods to include large, realistic cell surface geometries, sub-cellular organelles, and protein complex 
distributions for finite-element simulations; and (3) the lack of automatic and parallel 3D 
mesh-generation techniques for complicated molecular/sub-cellular assemblies with correct topology and robust quality improvement.

To overcome these barriers, we established a novel computational framework of multi-scale geometric 
modeling and mesh generation. The proposed algorithms will provide parallelized systematic methods to 
automatically construct multi-scale, finite-element geometric models and high-quality meshes that will help 
advance our understanding of anatomical and physiological properties at molecular, sub-cell, and cellular scales 
using the predictive NBCR/UCSD cardiac models. The proposed algorithms and software tools of this CSP will 
be validated by importing the constructed meshes directly to Smolfin (https://bitbucket.org/huskeypm/smolfin), 
a software package at NBCR/UCSD for adaptive finite-element analysis of protein complexes properties and 
calcium signaling in cardiomyocytes with realistic geometries.

On a figure, high resolution is shown for the actin domain (cyan). 
(a) biomolecular surface; 
(b) exterior tetrahedral mesh; 
(c) exterior mesh with embedded protein.
